Updates to triaging guide: Issue prioritization and high-level triage workflow (#1308)
earthaccess-dev/earthaccess: docs/contributor/triaging.md

# Issue Triaging and Prioritization Guide

This document outlines our approach to triaging issues in GitHub, including guidelines for labeling and resolving issues, and best practices for maintaining a well-organized, prioritized, and up-to-date issue tracker. 

**We hope that this guide will empower anyone to contribute to issue triaging, and address a common question for contributors: "I'm interested in working on the highest priority issues that will solve important problems facing the `earthaccess` community. Where do I begin?"**

> See the [Issue grooming](#issue-grooming) section below for details on how to identify and browse prioritized issues via the [`earthaccess` GitHub Project](https://github.com/orgs/earthaccess-dev/projects/1).

Reviewer: I suggest we maybe call this section "Issue prioritization" to be in line with the title of the page.

Reviewer: Right now this section sort of blends in/ gets lost with all the other text. I wonder if putting it in a nice little info box could add a visual separation, and then adding something like:
"Want to start working quickly?" before the "see this section for details...." content might draw attention to it.

> ## Issue Lifecycle

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Issue lifecycle
```

- An issue is a duplicate of an existing issue that has already been addressed.

When closing an issue as not planned:

- Provide a clear explanation as to why the issue is not planned or feasible.
- Offer alternative solutions or workarounds, if possible.
- Link to relevant documentation or resources, if applicable.

### Labeling issues

When labeling an issue, choose the [label(s)](https://github.com/earthaccess-dev/earthaccess/labels) that best describes the issue. Using labels consistently and accurately ensures that issues are trackable and searchable. 

Labels are mainly categorized by the prefix `type:`, `impact:`, or `needs:`. 
Impact labels describe what portion of the project they affect. Impact labels are also used to help group related issues based on a particular feature or topic. For example, **impact: virtual-datasets** is used to categorize Issues or Discussions related to virtualizarr integration and support. These labels may evolve over time as new features are worked. 

Refer to the [Labels](https://github.com/earthaccess-dev/earthaccess/labels) page for details on label types and descriptions. 

> #### Linking Labels in GitHub Markdown

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Linking labels in GitHub Markdown
```

### Priority: `2 - Important`

The issue has real impact but is not immediately blocking a majority of users.

- Affects primary user workflows but a workaround exists, or only a subset of users is affected
- Incorrect or confusing content that degrades the experience without fully blocking users
- Less common use cases or data collections are impacted

*Bug example:* Functionality is degraded but users can still accomplish their goals.

*Documentation example:* A Tutorial or secondary documentation is broken or unclear; contributing docs with significant usability issues.

### Priority: `3 - Nice to have` 

The issue is a real improvement but not urgent.

- Affects a small percentage of users, data collections, or use cases
- Polish, enhancements, or "nice to haves" with no meaningful workflow impact
- Minor inconsistencies or style issues

*Bug example:* Affects a small number of users, data collections, or edge-case workflows; a workaround is readily available or the impact is cosmetic.

*Documentation example:* Minor inconsistencies, typos, or style issues; improvements to contributing or developer-facing docs with no impact on end-user workflows.

### Notes for Triagers

> - **When in doubt, start at Medium** and adjust based on community feedback or additional context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **When in doubt, start at Important** and adjust based on community feedback or additional context.
```

Author: I just saw that I missed this suggestion in the first round of feedback, sorry about that!

- The [User Guide](https://earthaccess.readthedocs.io/en/stable/user/) and [API Reference](https://earthaccess.readthedocs.io/en/stable/api/) generally warrant higher priority than contributing or developer docs when impact is otherwise similar.
- Priority reflects *impact and urgency*, not effort — a quick fix can still be High priority.

## Working issues

> - [Assign](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/using-issues/assigning-issues-and-pull-requests-to-other-github-users) the issue to the implementer.

Reviewer: Doesn't this happen automatically for this library? I don't remember ever having to assign myself. I suppose the person creating the issue may not be the person who solves it, but in that case, there would be a PR created by someone else (which would be assigned to the PR creator).

Author: I am not aware of the Issue assignments happening automatically. Are you thinking about a workflow where a PR is submitted, and then the related Issue is linked? Is that where you would expect the Issue to get automatically assigned based on the PR assignment? Otherwise how would this be auto-assigned if the issue was in work?

Reviewer: oops, ignore this comment! I was getting the issue assignment functionality here in GitHub mixed up with another tool.

- Update status to `In Progress`.
- Link the issue to the related PR with a comment "Resolves #N" (`N` is the issue number). The issue will auto-close when the PR is merged.
- If the previous step is missed, [link any related PRs](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/using-issues/linking-a-pull-request-to-an-issue) before manually closing an issue.

> ## Issue Triaging Workflow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Issue triaging workflow
```

# Issue Triaging and Prioritization Guide

This document outlines our approach to triaging issues on GitHub, including guidelines for labeling and resolving issues, and best practices for maintaining a well-organized, prioritized, and up-to-date issue tracker via the [`earthaccess` GitHub Project](https://github.com/orgs/earthaccess-dev/projects/1). 

**We hope that this guide will help empower anyone to contribute to issue triaging, and address a common question for contributors: "I'm interested in working on the highest priority issues that will solve important problems facing the `earthaccess` community. Where do I begin?"**

## Issue Lifecycle

1. A [new issue](https://github.com/earthaccess-dev/earthaccess/issues/new/choose) is created, either using a pre-existing template, or as a blank issue.
2. The issue is triaged by a community member in order to: 

>    * Determine whether the issue should be worked or not. If yes, move to "Backlog" status, otherwise close as not planned.

Reviewer: Not sure if my docs preview is outdated or if markdown does not like the * bullet, but these are showing up as numbers to me. I like the idea of the * ones being bullets of #2, though!

Reviewer 2: _shakes fist at mkdocs_

I seriously don't like mkdocs. It doesn't do anything the way I expect from working with other markdown tools. Why not just do it the normal way!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   
    * Determine whether the issue should be worked or not. If yes, move to "Backlog" status, otherwise close as not planned.
```

I think we need **both** a blank line **and** exactly 4 spaces. :weary: https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/lists/#usage

   * Add or adjust issue labels.
   * Add an issue prioritization. 
   * Respond and follow up as needed (i.e. tagging relevant earthaccess maintainers for further support).
3. Issues are reviewed and groomed using the `earthaccess` [GitHub Project](https://github.com/orgs/earthaccess-dev/projects/1)
4. An issue is worked following the [Pull Request (PR) Guide](./pr-guide.md).
   * The issue is self-assigned and moved to an `In Progress` status.
   * The issue is linked to the related PR, and closed after the PR is merged.

Details on each of these workflow steps are provided below. 

> ## Moving an issue to Backlog status

Reviewer: Maybe this header should be something more along the lines of the main steps abbreviated above? So something like:
## A new issue is created
which then feeds into Matt's point below about how you want to first acknowledge receipt of the issue (and show gratitude).

Reviewer 2: And we could probably also mention the status of the issue when it's first created (i.e. no status) in this section. This motivates the next section!

# Issue Triaging and Prioritization Guide

> With a constant influx of new issues, it's essential to prioritize and categorize them efficiently to ensure that the most important problems are addressed promptly. This document outlines our approach to triaging issues on GitHub, including guidelines for labeling and resolving issues, as well as best practices for maintaining a well-organized, prioritized, and up-to-date issue tracker via the `earthaccess` [GitHub Project](https://github.com/orgs/earthaccess-dev/projects/1). 
> 
> !!! tip
> 
>     We hope that this guide will help empower anyone to contribute to issue triaging, and ultimately address a common question for both new and experienced contributors: "I'm interested in working on the highest priority issues that will solve important problems facing the `earthaccess` community. Where do I begin?"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document outlines our approach to triaging issues on GitHub, including guidelines for labeling and resolving issues, and best practices for maintaining a well-organized, prioritized, and up-to-date issue tracker via the [`earthaccess` GitHub Project](https://github.com/orgs/earthaccess-dev/projects/1). 

**We hope that this guide will help empower anyone to contribute to issue triaging, and address a common question for contributors: "I'm interested in working on the highest priority issues that will solve important problems facing the `earthaccess` community. Where do I begin?"**
```

I think that the stuff in the "tip" block is the most important bit -- the goal of this document, so I changed that to simple bold text. I think it's easy to skim over a "tip" as optional, but this is the guiding light for this doc IMO!

I'm being a bit nitpicky and brutal about shortening the prose. I think it's really important to be concise and help readers find the important stuff quickly.

## Issue Lifecycle

1. A [new issue](https://github.com/earthaccess-dev/earthaccess/issues/new/choose) is created, either using a pre-existing template, or as a blank issue.

> 2. The issue is triaged in order to: 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. The issue is triaged by a community member in order to: 
```

>    * Determine whether the issue should be pursued and moved to a Backlog status, or closed as not planned.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * Determine whether the issue should be worked or not. If yes, move to "Backlog" status, otherwise close as not planned.
```

   * Add or adjust issue labels.
   * Add an issue prioritization. 
   * Respond and follow up as needed (i.e. tagging relevant earthaccess maintainers for further support).

> 3. Issues are reviewed and groomed using the `earthaccess` [GitHub Project](https://github.com/orgs/earthaccess-dev/projects/1)

Reviewer 2: Needs accountability -- when / by whom? Without a person responsible or a cadence/habit of doing it together, it won't get done :)

Author: @mfisher87 Absolutely. 

I want any contributor to feel comfortable reviewing a new issue and doing all of these things. And at the same time, as you're raising, if we're not expecting this from a particular role or on a particular cadence, then I agree it will happen inconsistently (which is the case today). I would love to hold the community manager role accountable as the primary triager. Ideally I'd like to get in the habit of doing this at the collab cafe. Putting this in writing will empower me to play a more active role in this. And then in addition, we can open this up to any contributor who sees gaps in any/all of these steps within a given issue. What do you think about this?

Reviewer 2: I think this sounds great :grin: Thanks for being an awesome community manager, Amy!

Reviewer: Sounds great, Amy.

Author: Updated language on community manager expectations, with the broader community welcomed and encouraged

> 4. An issue is worked following the [Pull Request (PR) Guiide](./pr-guide.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. An issue is worked following the [Pull Request (PR) Guide](./pr-guide.md).
```

>    * The issue is self-assigned and moved to an `In Progress` status.
>    * The issue is linked to the related PR, and closed after the PR is merged.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * [Assign](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/using-issues/assigning-issues-and-pull-requests-to-other-github-users) the issue to the implementer.
   * Update status to `In Progress`.
   * Link the issue to the related PR with a comment "Resolves #N" (`N` is the issue number). The issue will auto-close when the PR is merged.
   * If the previous step is missed, [link any related PRs](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/tracking-your-work-with-issues/using-issues/linking-a-pull-request-to-an-issue) before manually closing an issue.
```

Details on each of these workflow steps are provided below. 

## Moving an issue to Backlog status

> This section will cover the `earthaccess` project status, guidelines for when to use the "Close Issue as Not Planned" feature, and how to handle issues that are not planned or feasible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

I think this is well-covered by the sub-headings!

### Project status

By default, all new issues are created without a project status. Issues without a status are listed in the [Needs Triage](https://github.com/orgs/earthaccess-dev/projects/1/views/3) project view. Statuses include:

> - Backlog

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

- Backlog
```

- In Progress
- In Review
- Done

> When triaging a new issue, review the information and provide a response or follow up with question(s) if needed. Providing gratitude for the submission as a text or emoji response is highly encouraged. Move the issue to the Backlog unless it ought to be closed as "not planned", as outlined below. If you are unsure, add the **needs: triage** label. On the righthand side of the issue page, the "Projects" section contains an `earthaccess` project box. Click "no status" to select the status options. Select "Backlog". This will move the project out of the [Needs Triage](https://github.com/orgs/earthaccess-dev/projects/1/views/3) project view into its relevant backlog view depending on issue type. See below for more details on these other project views. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **First show gratitude for the submission as a text or emoji response.**
* Review the submission and provide a response or follow up with question(s) if needed.
* Move the issue to the Backlog unless it ought to be closed as "not planned", as outlined below. If you are unsure, add the **needs: triage** label. On the righthand side of the issue page, the "Projects" section contains an `earthaccess` project box. Click "no status" to select the status options. Select "Backlog". This will move the project out of the [Needs Triage](https://github.com/orgs/earthaccess-dev/projects/1/views/3) project view into its relevant backlog view depending on issue type. See below for more details on these other project views. 
```

To me, "Moving an issue to backlog status" doesn't feel like the right way to organize this comment. The first two bullets are more like "Initial interaction". They just don't feel coupled or related to the heading and could be easily skipped if the reader already knows how to change the issue status.

Reviewer: Yeah, the first two bullets could be earlier in this process... and then the third one makes sense under a "project status" sub-header.

### When to "Close as not planned"?

Close issues as "not planned" when:

- An issue is not aligned with the project's goals or priorities.
- An issue is not feasible to be addressed due to technical or resource constraints.
- An issue is a duplicate of an existing issue that has already been addressed.

> When closing an issue as not planned, keep the following best practices in mind:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When closing an issue as not planned:
```

- Provide a clear explanation as to why the issue is not planned or feasible.
- Offer alternative solutions or workarounds, if possible.

> - Link to relevant documentation or resources, if applicable.

Reviewer 2: Nice :)

> - Add the **type: will not do** label.

Reviewer 2: Do we need the label too? The "not planned" status communicates this well, IMO

Author: Good point, this does seem redundant. If we don't include this in the guidance, then should we also remove the label entirely? Is there a use case for the label w/o closing as "not planned"?

Author: @saberbrasher and I agree that this is redundant. I will remove this bullet, and also we should remove the label itself from our repo.

### Issue Types

- **type: bug**: Use for issues that identify bugs causing incorrect or unexpected behavior. This label is applied automatically if the [Bug template](https://github.com/earthaccess-dev/earthaccess/issues/new?template=bug.yml) is used.
- **type: decision record**: Use this label for issues and PR's that address a new decision record document (e.g. https://github.com/earthaccess-dev/earthaccess/pull/1047).   
- **type: duplicate**: Use this label for issues that are duplicates of existing ones.
- **type: enhancement**: Use this label for requests for new features or improvements to existing functionalities.
- **type: experience report**: Use this label for issues that describe a firsthand usability experience. 
- **type: metrics**: This label is automatically applied upon creation of the Monthly metrics issue. See the [Monthly issue metrics](https://github.com/earthaccess-dev/earthaccess/blob/main/.github/workflows/issue-metrics.yml) action for more details.  

> - **type: will not do**: Use this label for issues that won’t be addressed or fixed.

Reviewer 2: How much of this can be moved to the label descriptions in GitHub? It'd be nice to not have to keep this part of the page in sync. Maybe this page could just describe the categories of labels instead of each individual label.

Author: Great point! I will add/sync these curated descriptions to the labels in GH, and reference https://github.com/earthaccess-dev/earthaccess/labels here instead.

- **impact: core**: Issues that affect the core Python codebase.
- **impact: dependencies**: Use this label for issues concerning dependencies.
- **impact: documentation**: Use this label for issues related to documentation.
- **impact: automation**: Use this label for issues related to the CI/CD pipeline or automation.
- **impact: governance**: Issues that impact the project's governance or decision-making process.

Impact labels are also used to help group related issues based on a particular feature or topic. For example, **impact: virtual-datasets** is used to categorize Issues or Discussions related to virtualizarr integration and support. These labels may evolve over time as new features are worked. 

### Needs labels

- **needs: decision**: We're struggling to decide what to do and the decision committee needs to help.
- **needs: feedback**:  Use this label for issues where feedback is requested from the team or our community.
- **needs: help**: Use this label for issues where additional help or contributions are needed.

> - **needs: triage**: Use this label for new issues that require additional information to determine whether it should move to the backlog, or close as not planned. 

Reviewer: Is it confusing that issues without a status auto go to the "needs triage" section of the project page, but then this label does not get auto applied if one is not selected when an issue is created?

Reviewer 2: I think we can ditch this label entirely, the "No status" status is an indicator for that already!

Otherwise we can set up our issue templates to auto-apply this label.

### Priority: `2 - Important`

The issue has real impact but is not immediately blocking a majority of users.

- Affects primary user workflows but a workaround exists, or only a subset of users is affected
- Incorrect or confusing content that degrades the experience without fully blocking users
- Less common use cases or data collections are impacted

*Bug example:* Functionality is degraded but users can still accomplish their goals.

*Documentation example:* A Tutorial or secondary documentation is broken or unclear; contributing docs with significant usability issues.

### Priority: `3 - Nice to have` 

The issue is a real improvement but not urgent.

- Affects a small percentage of users, data collections, or use cases
- Polish, enhancements, or "nice to haves" with no meaningful workflow impact
- Minor inconsistencies or style issues

*Bug example:* Affects a small number of users, data collections, or edge-case workflows; a workaround is readily available or the impact is cosmetic.

*Documentation example:* Minor inconsistencies, typos, or style issues; improvements to contributing or developer-facing docs with no impact on end-user workflows.

### Notes for Triagers

> - **When in doubt, start at Medium** and adjust based on community feedback or additional context.

Reviewer: By Medium do you mean 2 - Important?

Author: Missed this earlier, and just accepted your suggested edit!

https://github.com/earthaccess-dev/earthaccess/labels/good%20first%20issue
```

## Issue Prioritization

Issue priorities are surfaced within the [Bug Priority](https://github.com/orgs/earthaccess-dev/projects/1/views/4) and [Docs](https://github.com/orgs/earthaccess-dev/projects/1/views/6) project views. When triaging a new issue, select a priority based on the user impact and urgency. The following guidelines apply broadly across issue types, with additional notes for bugs and documentation issues.

> ### Priority: `1- Critical`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Priority: `1 - Critical`
```

The issue has significant, immediate impact on users and/or major components of the `earthaccess` library. 

- Core functionality is broken or inaccessible for a meaningful number of users
- Key workflows or use cases are blocked
- Users are likely to stop using the library or lose trust in it

*Bug example:* Users cannot search or access data for a significant number of collections or key `earthaccess` workflows.

> *Documentation example:* Content is incorrect or missing in a way that would immediately block or mislead a user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

*Documentation example:* Content is incorrect or missing in a way that would immediately block or mislead a user.
```

### Priority: `2 - Important`

The issue has real impact but is not immediately blocking a majority of users.

- Affects primary user workflows but a workaround exists, or only a subset of users is affected
- Incorrect or confusing content that degrades the experience without fully blocking users
- Less common use cases or data collections are impacted

*Bug example:* Functionality is degraded but users can still accomplish their goals.

> *Documentation example:* A Tutorial or secondary documentation is broken or unclear; contributing docs with significant usability issues.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

*Documentation example:* A Tutorial or secondary documentation is broken or unclear; contributing docs with significant usability issues.
```

### Priority: `3 - Nice to have` 

The issue is a real improvement but not urgent.

- Affects a small percentage of users, data collections, or use cases
- Polish, enhancements, or "nice to haves" with no meaningful workflow impact
- Minor inconsistencies or style issues

*Bug example:* Affects a small number of users, data collections, or edge-case workflows; a workaround is readily available or the impact is cosmetic.

> *Documentation example:* Minor inconsistencies, typos, or style issues; improvements to contributing or developer-facing docs with no impact on end-user workflows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

*Documentation example:* Minor inconsistencies, typos, or style issues; improvements to contributing or developer-facing docs with no impact on end-user workflows.
```

- Priority reflects *impact and urgency*, not effort — a quick fix can still be High priority.

## Issue Triaging Workflow

``` mermaid

flowchart TD
  %%{init: {"flowchart": {"htmlLabels": false}} }%%
  classDef default font-size:32pt;
  start{"`Followed
  issue
  template?`"}
  start ==NO==> close1[Request needed information from reporter and update issue on behalf of reporter]
  start == YES ==> dupe{Is duplicate?}
  dupe == YES ==> close2[Close and point to duplicate]
  dupe == NO ==> repro{Has proper reproduction?}
  repro == NO ==> close3[Label: 'needs reproduction' bot will auto close if no update has been made in 3 days]
  repro == YES ==> real{Is actually a bug?}
  real == NO ==> intended{Is the intended behaviour?}
  intended == YES ==> explain[Explain and close point to docs if needed]
  intended == NO ==> open[Keep open for discussion Remove 'pending triage' label]
  real == YES ==> real2["Confirm that 'Bug' label was automatically added as part of the Bug Issue template, otherwise add 'Bug' label."]

  %% Link Color %%
    linkStyle default stroke:black,stroke-width:2px,font-size:24pt;

```

## Discussions vs Issues

> TODO Move to https://earthaccess.readthedocs.io/en/latest/contributor/ ?

Reviewer 2: I do think this should move, but I'm not sure where this should go. This is part of the contributor funnel, IMO, not necessarily for people who are already contributors. So we might want this to be in the user guide in a dedicated page about "How to report a problem or make a suggestion"? I dunno :)

"How to migrate between them" probably should stay here.

Author: Yep, I had the same thought on keeping the migrating instructions here. I like the idea of a separate page. We have a nice list of other engagement venues on https://earthaccess.readthedocs.io/en/latest/contributor/ so that also makes me wonder if all of that content should move out. Hmm.

Reviewer 2: Good point. I think "When contributing we recommend:" should stay, but probably "Then, you can:" should move out to a dedicated "entry-point". Or be copied so it's in both places. But then we have to sync them.

I've been thinking about this for GeoJupyter and started work on it. I love the idea of a menu-like experience for people looking to get in to contributing. E.g. something like these

* https://openscapes.org/resources
* https://antennapod.org/contribute/

The WIP for GJ is here: https://github.com/geojupyter/geojupyter.org/issues/127

Maybe for earthaccess we add a "contributing menu" and link to it on this page so we don't have to duplicate anything https://earthaccess.readthedocs.io/en/latest/contributor/

Reviewer: Agree that the Discussions vs. Issues content could/ should move... in the short term, I lean toward maybe just expanding a bit on what is present on this page https://earthaccess.readthedocs.io/en/latest/contributor/ assuming that is the first page someone who is on the fence about contributing would go to. Not sure what the best long term solution is, though!

Author: I have only retained the "when to migrate" content here. Perhaps we can consider a separate PR on updates to the Contributing guide landing page, related to what @saberbrasher is already thinking out via #1200 discussion.

Author: Since @saberbrasher is going to move forward with updates to the contributor guide, I will resolve this thread.
